# How to contribute

I'm really glad you're reading this because we need volunteer developers to help this project come to fruition.

## Submitting hanges workflow

### Project contributors

#### Creating a branch for changes

* Before making any changes, create a branch from the *main branch* where you will work on your task.  
  If you're unfamiliar with Git, refer to [GitHub: Creating a branch](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/creating-and-deleting-branches-within-your-repository#creating-a-branch).
* The branch name should follow the pattern: `dev_<nickname/name>_<ticket_number>` (e.g., `dev_john_#1`).
* Use a **separate branch per task or feature**.

#### Commit message guidelines

This aligns with commit messages generated by `git merge` and `git revert`.

* **Include a ticket number** in the commit summary, if applicable (e.g., `[#1] Add guidelines for contributors`).
* **Keep the commit summary ≤ 72 characters**.
* Write **a detailed description**, wrapped at **72 characters per line**.
* **Ensure a blank line** separates the summary from the body (unless the body is omitted).
* **Use the imperative mood** (e.g., "Fix bug" instead of "Fixed bug" or "Fixes bug"). 

A properly formed commit summary should always complete the following sentence:  
*If applied, this commit will \<your subject line here\>*.

A commit message example:
```
[#1] Add guidelines for contributors

Provides clarity on making structured contributions and outlines 
the project deployment process for contributors.
```

Additionally, adhere to our [**coding conventions**](#coding-conventions) and **ensure all commits are atomic (one feature per commit)**.

#### Pushing changes & creating a pull request (PR)

* Push your changes to the remote repository when your changes are ready.  
  If you need help, refer to [GitHub: Pushing commits to a remote repository](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/using-git/pushing-commits-to-a-remote-repository).
* **Create a pull request (PR)** from your development branch to ensure your changes are reviewed.  
  Follow [GitHub: Creating a pull request](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/creating-a-pull-request?tool=webui) documentation for this.
* **Do not submit commits directly to the *main* branch**.

#### Cleaning up branches

* After a successful review and merge, delete your local and remote development branches.  
If you're unfamiliar with the process, see [GitHub: Deleting a branch](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/creating-and-deleting-branches-within-your-repository#deleting-a-branch).
  
### External contributors

We truly appreciate your interest in contributing to this project!

You must follow the same guidelines as the [project contributors](#project-contributors), except the first step is to fork the repository to create your own copy before making changes.
For guidance on this process, refer to [GitHub: Contributing to a project](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/exploring-projects-on-github/contributing-to-a-project).

## Coding conventions

This is open-source software, and it is important to consider the people who will read your code. Make it as clear and well-structured as possible for them.

We prioritize readability in our code:

* Each file should include a description of its purpose and why the module is needed.
* Descriptions for functions or methods are optional but preferred for clarity.

## Project deployment

The project is written in Python 3, so the deployment process relies on installing the required dependencies.
The easiest way to keep your system clean is to use [virtual environments](https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html).

Let's imagine the project is cloned to the directory `/workspace/jarvis` (or `C:\workspace\jarvis`)

#### Unix/MacOS
```
$ python3 -m venv /workspace/jarvis/.venv       # Create a virtual environment
$ source /workspace/jarvis/.venv/bin/activate   # Activate the virtual environment
$ which python                                  # Confirm that the virtual environment is activated
$ pip install -r src/backend/requirements.txt   # Install required packages for the backend
$ pip install -r src/frontend/requirements.txt  # Install required packages for the frontend
```

#### Windows
```
> python3 -m venv C:\workspace\jarvis\.venv     # Create a virtual environment
> .venv\Scripts\activate                        # Activate the virtual environment
> where python                                  # Confirm that the virtual environment is activated
> pip install -r src/backend/requirements.txt   # Install required packages for the backend
> pip install -r src/frontend/requirements.txt  # Install required packages for the frontend
```

To exit your virtual environment, simply run the `deactivate` command.  
To reactivate an existing virtual environment, follow the same activation instructions. There's no need to create a new one.

Additionally, `pip install` supports multiple requirements files simultaneously; thus, you can use a single command to install all necessary packages.
For example, `pip install -r src/backend/requirements.txt -r src/frontend/requirements.txt`.


***This documentation may be updated in the future as we are only at the beginning of our journey.***

Thanks!
